README.md, before:

# Montgomery multiplication benchmarks

What is the fastest way to perform Montgomery multiplication for large prime
fields on ARM-based mobile devices? To find the answer, this repo implements
and benchmarks various Montgomery multiplication algorithms.

Throughout the repo, the [BN254](https://hackmd.io/@jpw/bn254) scalar field is
used as the prime order:
`0x30644e72e131a029b85045b68181585d2833e84879b9709143e1f593f0000001`.

## Install requirements

In Ubuntu Linux:

```bash
sudo apt install gcc make gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu qemu-aarch64
```

## Algorithms implemented

- [x] The CIOS method by [Acar
  (1996)](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/1996/01/j37acmon.pdf).
- [x] The [gnark optimisation](https://hackmd.io/@gnark/modular_multiplication)
  of CIOS in
  [BH23](https://tches.iacr.org/index.php/TCHES/article/view/10972/10279).
- [x] The NEON-optimised method in [BM17](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/1057.pdf) by Joppe Bos.
- [ ] Montgomery squaring variants of all of the above algorithms.

The following algorithms are not yet implemented:

- [ ] Yuval Domb's CIOS [implementation](https://github.com/ingonyama-zk/ingo_skyscraper/tree/main/src).
- [ ] Further optimisations to BM17 in [SLGCK14](https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/760.pdf).
- [ ] Mitscha-Baude's [reduced-radix FIOS method](https://github.com/mitschabaude/montgomery/blob/main/doc/zprize22.md#13-x-30-bit-multiplication).
- [ ] Niall Emmart's [floating-point-based method](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8464792/).
- [ ] Montgomery squaring variants of all of the above algorithms.

| Algorithm           | 32-bit limbs | 64-bit limbs | NEON | Squaring | Notes                                                 |
|-|-|-|-|-|-|
| Acar (CIOS)         | Done         | Done         | N/A  | TODO     |                                                       |
| BH23                | Done         | Done         | N/A  | TODO     | The gnark-optimised version of CIOS.                  |
| BM17                | Done         | TODO         | Yes  | TODO     | Uses NEON vector instructions.                        |
| SLGCK14             | TODO         | TODO         | Y    | TODO     | Optimisations to BM17.                                |
| Yuval Domb CIOS     | TODO         | TODO         | TODO | TODO     |                                                       |
| EZW18               | TODO         | TODO         | ?    | TODO     | Emmart's method. Requires floating-point `madd`.      |

| Algorithm           | 29-bit limbs | 30-bit limbs | NEON | Squaring | Notes                                                 |
|-|-|-|-|-|-|
| Mitscha-Baude       | TODO         | TODO         | TODO | TODO     | Reduced-radix FIOS                                    |

### BH23

Achieves minor performance gains over the classic CIOS method by Acar by
skipping certain steps of the algorithm if highest word of the prime modulus
meets a certain condition, which the BN254 scalar field order satisfies. 

### BM17

The key optimisation in BM17 is its use of NEON vector instructions to perform
identical arithmetic steps of the interleaved  , particularly the `vmlal_u32`
instruction, which performs 2-lane multiply-and-add operations.

## Preliminary results

The following benchmarks of 2^20 sequential Montgomery multiplications over the
BN254 scalar field were run on the Raspberry Pi 5 (ARM Cortex-A76):

| Algorithm | Limb size | Time taken (ms) |
|-----------|-----------|-----------------|
| Acar      | 32 bits   | 208             |
| Acar      | 64 bits   | 114             |
| BH23      | 32 bits   | 200             |
| BH23      | 64 bits   | 110             |
| BM17      | 32 bits   | 137             |

## Potential research directions

- Combine Emmart's method with BM17 or SLGCK14. Emmart's method only uses one
  out of two available lanes, and it's possible that multiplications in BM17
  can be achieved via the floating-point trick. Furthermore, the larger limb
  size may provide a speedup.

## Quick start

To build and run on an x86 machine:

```bash
make
make run_tests
make run_benchmarks
```

To run the benchmarks on an ARM device:

```bash
make run_benchmarks_neon
```

Alternatively, cross-compile the benchmarks on your desktop machine, copy the
following binaries to the device, and run them.

```
build/benchmarks/acar/benchmark_neon
build/benchmarks/bm17/benchmark_neon
build/benchmarks/bh23/benchmark_neon
# ... and so on
```

They have been tested with a Raspberry Pi 5, specifically the CanaKit 8GB version.

`lscpu`:

```
Architecture:             aarch64
  CPU op-mode(s):         32-bit, 64-bit
  Byte Order:             Little Endian
CPU(s):                   4
  On-line CPU(s) list:    0-3
Vendor ID:                ARM
  Model name:             Cortex-A76
    Model:                1
    Thread(s) per core:   1
    Core(s) per cluster:  4
    Socket(s):            -
    Cluster(s):           1
    Stepping:             r4p1
    CPU(s) scaling MHz:   75%
    CPU max MHz:          2400.0000
    CPU min MHz:          1500.0000
    BogoMIPS:             108.00
    Flags:                fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
Caches (sum of all):      
  L1d:                    256 KiB (4 instances)
  L1i:                    256 KiB (4 instances)
  L2:                     2 MiB (4 instances)
  L3:                     2 MiB (1 instance)
Vulnerabilities:          
  Gather data sampling:   Not affected
  Itlb multihit:          Not affected
  L1tf:                   Not affected
  Mds:                    Not affected
  Meltdown:               Not affected
  Mmio stale data:        Not affected
  Reg file data sampling: Not affected
  Retbleed:               Not affected
  Spec rstack overflow:   Not affected
  Spec store bypass:      Mitigation; Speculative Store Bypass disabled via prctl
  Spectre v1:             Mitigation; __user pointer sanitization
  Spectre v2:             Mitigation; CSV2, BHB
  Srbds:                  Not affected
  Tsx async abort:        Not affected
```


`/proc/cpuinfo`:

```
$ cat /proc/cpuinfo 
processor       : 0
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

processor       : 1
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

processor       : 2
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

processor       : 3
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

Revision        : d04170
Serial          : 94e9857859362cfa
Model           : Raspberry Pi 5 Model B Rev 1.0
```

Commit message:

simple black-box function to make benchmarks more accurate; refactored mont_mul functions to be able to benchmark without the final reduction; updated readme and benchmark results

README.md, after:

# Montgomery multiplication benchmarks

What is the fastest way to perform Montgomery multiplication for large prime
fields on ARM-based mobile devices? To find the answer, this repo implements
and benchmarks various Montgomery multiplication algorithms.

Throughout the repo, the [BN254](https://hackmd.io/@jpw/bn254) scalar field is
used as the prime order:
`0x30644e72e131a029b85045b68181585d2833e84879b9709143e1f593f0000001`.

## Install requirements

In Ubuntu Linux:

```bash
sudo apt install gcc make gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu qemu-aarch64
```

## Algorithms implemented

- [x] The CIOS method by [Acar
  (1996)](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/1996/01/j37acmon.pdf).
- [x] The [gnark optimisation](https://hackmd.io/@gnark/modular_multiplication)
  of CIOS in
  [BH23](https://tches.iacr.org/index.php/TCHES/article/view/10972/10279).
- [x] The NEON-optimised method in [BM17](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/1057.pdf) by Joppe Bos.
- [ ] Montgomery squaring variants of all of the above algorithms.

The following algorithms are not yet implemented:

- [ ] Yuval Domb's CIOS [implementation](https://github.com/ingonyama-zk/ingo_skyscraper/tree/main/src).
- [ ] Further optimisations to BM17 in [SLGCK14](https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/760.pdf).
- [ ] Mitscha-Baude's [reduced-radix FIOS method](https://github.com/mitschabaude/montgomery/blob/main/doc/zprize22.md#13-x-30-bit-multiplication).
- [ ] Niall Emmart's [floating-point-based method](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8464792/).
- [ ] Montgomery squaring variants of all of the above algorithms.

| Algorithm           | 32-bit limbs | 64-bit limbs | NEON | Squaring | Notes                                                 |
|-|-|-|-|-|-|
| Acar (CIOS)         | Done         | Done         | N/A  | TODO     |                                                       |
| BH23                | Done         | Done         | N/A  | TODO     | The gnark-optimised version of CIOS.                  |
| BM17                | Done         | TODO         | Yes  | TODO     | Uses NEON vector instructions.                        |
| SLGCK14             | TODO         | TODO         | Y    | TODO     | Optimisations to BM17.                                |
| Yuval Domb CIOS     | TODO         | TODO         | TODO | TODO     |                                                       |
| EZW18               | TODO         | TODO         | ?    | TODO     | Emmart's method. Requires floating-point `madd`.      |

| Algorithm           | 29-bit limbs | 30-bit limbs | NEON | Squaring | Notes                                                 |
|-|-|-|-|-|-|
| Mitscha-Baude       | TODO         | TODO         | TODO | TODO     | Reduced-radix FIOS                                    |

### BH23

Achieves minor performance gains over the classic CIOS method by Acar by
skipping certain steps of the algorithm if highest word of the prime modulus
meets a certain condition, which the BN254 scalar field order satisfies. 

### BM17

The key optimisation in BM17 is its use of NEON vector instructions to perform
identical arithmetic steps of the interleaved  , particularly the `vmlal_u32`
instruction, which performs 2-lane multiply-and-add operations.

## Preliminary results

The following benchmarks are of 2^20 sequential Montgomery multiplications over
the BN254 scalar field were run on the Raspberry Pi 5 (ARM Cortex-A76). The
final reduction is omittted.

| Algorithm | Limb size | Time taken (ms) |
|-----------|-----------|-----------------|
| Acar      | 32 bits   | 224             |
| Acar      | 64 bits   | 104             |
| BH23      | 32 bits   | 194             |
| BH23      | 64 bits   | 104             |
| BM17      | 32 bits   | 123             |

## Potential research directions

- Combine Emmart's method with BM17 or SLGCK14. Emmart's method only uses one
  out of two available lanes, and it's possible that multiplications in BM17
  can be achieved via the floating-point trick. Furthermore, the larger limb
  size may provide a speedup.

## Quick start

To build and run on an x86 machine:

```bash
make
make run_tests
make run_benchmarks
```

To run the benchmarks on an ARM device:

```bash
make run_benchmarks_neon
```

Alternatively, cross-compile the benchmarks on your desktop machine, copy the
following binaries to the device, and run them.

```
build/benchmarks/acar/benchmark_neon
build/benchmarks/bm17/benchmark_neon
build/benchmarks/bh23/benchmark_neon
# ... and so on
```

They have been tested with a Raspberry Pi 5, specifically the CanaKit 8GB version.

`lscpu`:

```
Architecture:             aarch64
  CPU op-mode(s):         32-bit, 64-bit
  Byte Order:             Little Endian
CPU(s):                   4
  On-line CPU(s) list:    0-3
Vendor ID:                ARM
  Model name:             Cortex-A76
    Model:                1
    Thread(s) per core:   1
    Core(s) per cluster:  4
    Socket(s):            -
    Cluster(s):           1
    Stepping:             r4p1
    CPU(s) scaling MHz:   75%
    CPU max MHz:          2400.0000
    CPU min MHz:          1500.0000
    BogoMIPS:             108.00
    Flags:                fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
Caches (sum of all):      
  L1d:                    256 KiB (4 instances)
  L1i:                    256 KiB (4 instances)
  L2:                     2 MiB (4 instances)
  L3:                     2 MiB (1 instance)
Vulnerabilities:          
  Gather data sampling:   Not affected
  Itlb multihit:          Not affected
  L1tf:                   Not affected
  Mds:                    Not affected
  Meltdown:               Not affected
  Mmio stale data:        Not affected
  Reg file data sampling: Not affected
  Retbleed:               Not affected
  Spec rstack overflow:   Not affected
  Spec store bypass:      Mitigation; Speculative Store Bypass disabled via prctl
  Spectre v1:             Mitigation; __user pointer sanitization
  Spectre v2:             Mitigation; CSV2, BHB
  Srbds:                  Not affected
  Tsx async abort:        Not affected
```


`/proc/cpuinfo`:

```
$ cat /proc/cpuinfo 
processor       : 0
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

processor       : 1
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

processor       : 2
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

processor       : 3
BogoMIPS        : 108.00
Features        : fp asimd evtstrm aes pmull sha1 sha2 crc32 atomics fphp asimdhp cpuid asimdrdm lrcpc dcpop asimddp
CPU implementer : 0x41
CPU architecture: 8
CPU variant     : 0x4
CPU part        : 0xd0b
CPU revision    : 1

Revision        : d04170
Serial          : 94e9857859362cfa
Model           : Raspberry Pi 5 Model B Rev 1.0
```
